Code for: How catastrophic is catastrophic? LiDAR assessment of forest structural change after the 2009 Black Saturday bushfires

Authors: Kaitlyn L. Hammond (1), Craig R. Nitschke (1), and Patrick J. Baker School of Agriculture, Food, and Ecosystem Sciences, University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia

Correspondance: kaitlyn.hammond@student.unimelb.edu.au

Abstract: Silvicultural approaches based on natural disturbances are the basis of modern sustainable forest management. In the mountain ash (Eucalyptus regnans) forests of southeastern Australia, it has been argued for decades that Clearfell, Burn, and Sow (CBS) silviculture emulates the impacts of large, high-severity wildfires. To assess whether the impacts of CBS silviculture aligned with the impacts of high-severity wildfire, we compared patches that lost all canopy cover in the 2009 Black Saturday bushfires to coupes harvested using the CBS method between 1974 and 2024. We analysed patch-scale differences, landscape-scale differences, and differences in the topographic position of burnt and harvested patches. We found that most coupes harvested using CBS silviculture were larger, more aggregated, and had less complex shapes than patches burned in the 2009 Black Saturday bushfires, even though they were distributed across a similar range of topographic features. Our results indicate that CBS silviculture did not align with the impacts of one of the most severe wildfires in the past century. Using LiDAR-derived maps of canopy structure before and after the 2009 fires, we explore what a natural disturbance-based approach might look like by classifying each ~2-ha area of fire-affected forest (83,000 ha in total) into one of several silvicultural systems that better represent the range of disturbance severity observed in the 2009 Black Saturday bushfires.

Notes: The code for the analysis is available here. The data (including the forest structure classes developed from the LiDAR scans and a 50-cm resolution DEM of the Central Highlands region) are available upon request.
